---
title: A Forgotten Piece Of The Diversity Puzzle
date: 2016-01-12
excerpt: My position on women in tech, what might be keeping them away, and what we can do about it.
tags: politics
---

<span class="run-in"><span class="drop">T</span>he topic of diversity</span> in
the sciences — perhaps especially in computing — has been hotly debated for at
least as long as I've had a career. The topic is deeply political and strongly
divisive, and as a result of the current social climate it is dangerous for me —
a heterosexual white male — to proffer an opinion, so I will make my position
clear immediately: I do not subscribe to modern feminist theory (of which there
are many flavours of varying degrees of radicalism) though I do absolutely
believe it is important to encourage more women to write software.

A core point of contention in the tech diversity debate is whether or not
either sex has some inherent mental advantage. Perhaps programming computers is
more suited to the left-brained. Perhaps those who can multi-task, or with more
finely tuned soft skills are better at creating a useful software product.
Attribute those qualities to whichever sex you wish, but I would argue that
these details simply don't matter.

There is some truth in the idea that the software industry is hostile towards
women, and this is perhaps why so many women self-select out of it. A more
obvious and less discussed point however is that the industry is just plain
boring. Software development is a male-dominated industry, and as a result we
produce solutions to male-dominated problems. The act of writing code is a
largely uninteresting means to an end for either sex. It's the fact that
software is a platform for driving innovation and improving people's lives that
makes it interesting.

In the best-selling 37signals book *Rework*, Jason Fried and David Heinemeier
Hansson advise that the best way to create a product is to “scratch your own
itch.”

> When you build a product or service, you make the call on hundreds of tiny
> decisions each day. If you’re solving someone else’s problem, you’re
> constantly stabbing in the dark. When you solve your own problem, the light
> comes on. You know exactly what the right answer is.

If I — a heterosexual white male — were to try and imagine a product that were
appealing for women to use, I'm confident that my idea would be so embarrassing
and off-target that I would be laughed out of the room. And when you think
about it, that should be obvious. I don't see the importance of affirmative
action, fulfilling quotas, or keeping “token” people on staff. I do however
believe that as a society we don't have enough insight into which problems are
worth solving, because the people who might bring that insight aren't being
represented in the industry.

It's not enough to simply have a diverse team where all the nerdy white guys
write the code and everyone else does the rest. Because the technical barrier
to launching a software project is lower than ever, it's becoming increasingly
common for a project's domain expert and software writer to actually be the
same person. If women aren't filling programming jobs, how can they be expected
to launch ground-breaking innovative products in their own time?

There are many initiatives in place to address the diversity problem such as
Rails Girls — a global series of events that provide women with tools and a
community to build their ideas — but there is still much work to be done.
Perhaps to further drive meaningful change, we need to think globally and act
locally.

Interestingly enough, this forces me to contradict myself with regards to my
opinion on affirmative action. Perhaps we *do* need to balance the ratio,
because this will be the only thing that counteracts the pattern of mostly one
type of person entering the industry, and the increasing homogeneity making it
less appealing for everyone else.

A diverse biology produces a stronger animal, and a diverse set of ideas
formulates a better social policy. I am absolutely convinced that a more
diverse set of perspectives and a more diverse collation of problems will
ultimately provide better software for everyone.
