---
title: Silence, At Last
date: 2018-12-14
location: London, UK
tags: career
banner: captain.jpg
---

So here I sit, at my father's tiny kitchen table, in my father's tiny central
London apartment, in the final hour of my final day of what I expect to be my
last ever day job.

I feel a simultaneous sense of calm and fatigue. At my interview for this job
almost two years ago, the then-CTO asked me your typical "Where do you see
yourself in five years?" type of question, to which I replied "I hope this is
my last ever job."

That isn't to say I won't ever work again. Far from it. This instead is the
beginning of a time when I run my own projects. I have NewBusinessMonitor, I
have Comparestack, and I have a third more ambitious project together with
two other business partners. I am yet to write publicly about this third
project, but it has received funding and will likely be my primary source of
income over the coming year.

The fatigue comes from a constant paranoid hustle I've endured over the past
seven years. I started my career at a small web development company in
Gothenburg, Sweden. I had no real skills to speak of. In fact when I started, I
thought that I should probably be a designer instead because programming is a
bit too hard for me. I think I won that company over with enthusiasm. I made
coffee for everyone in the office every morning. I would clean everyone's
desks. I would fetch the cases of beer on Friday afternoons from the local
alcohol monopoly.

At the time I was living in a three-bedroom apartment, along with sometimes 12
other people. There was no bed for me, so I slept every night on some cushions
on the floor. I didn't have money. I worked as a musician before my software
development career, which isn't a reliable source of income. I'm not
superstitious, but I did feel that the world had thrown me a bone when I got
that job. I intended to hustle hard and make the best of it.

Moving out of that apartment was a big day for me. I went nowhere glamorous; I
rented a room in an office. The room only had space for a bed and a wardrobe,
and I wasn't allowed to be in my room during the day as the office was in use.

After half a year of working, learning, and falling asleep at my computer every
evening while trying to learn more, it came time for me to move on to another
agency. And then another agency. And another. Over the years, I vied for
different positions and climbed whatever the software industry has in place of
a career ladder. The pace at which I hustled never slowed. I worked, and I
studied, and I worked, and I studied. I worked weekends. I had side-projects. I
attended conferences.

By 2016 I had it all. I was speaking at conferences. Living in a fancy
apartment. Wore a fancy watch. Drove a fancy car. Luxury holidays in exotic
lands. It was a complete life transformation. But as much as a high income buys
you luxury, unless it's your own wealth, it doesn't buy you freedom. And it
wasn't my own wealth. So I wasn't free.

And isn't that the ultimate luxury? To not be beholden to a Dilbert-esque
_Pointy-Haired Boss_. To have complete control over what you work on, and how
you work on it. To build something you actually care about, or at least have
some incentive to build it well. I feel great relief in that — as far as I can
tell — this is my future.

The sun has set, both figuratively and literally. Thus concluding my consulting
work.
