---
title: The Setup
date: 2013-07-02
location: Göteborg, Sweden
description: Tools I use to Get Stuff Done™
excerpt: A brief overview of the hardware and software I use to Get Stuff Done™.
tags: gear
---

There’s a gear-nerd site online called [The Setup](http://usesthis.com/) that
interviews notable developers, designers, artists and engineers, with a focus
on what equipment they use to Get Stuff Done. I’d like to join the fun too, so
here’s some information about my setup.

## What hardware do you use?

I use a 13" 1.3GHz i5 MacBook Air with 8GB of memory. I don’t have or need an
awful amount of disk space — my machine is mostly for wrangling text in various
forms. If I need to store anything large, I have a 2TB external disk.

I’ve somehow managed to build a large collection of audio equipment over the
years, but most of it is now redundant since adopting a sort of Bose-or-nothing
stance. I shuffle between QC15s (lifesaver!), MIE2is (mostly when driving), and
some desktop speakers.

I tend not to use a mouse so much, but when I do I have a wireless Logitech.
Not a fan of Android, so I have an iPhone.

## And what software?

I run OSX, but most of my workflow lives in the terminal. I do almost all text
editing with vim, and use ~~Grunt.js~~ simple Makefiles for automating tasks
like processing Sass and CoffeeScript.

I use a neat little tool called [tmux](http://tmux.sourceforge.net/) to help me
run several terminals at once. This is great for when I need to work on a
couple of machines at once via SSH, or if I want to watch a compile tool like
JSHint.

I use zsh instead of bash, just because it’s a little easier to use. I use both
Git and Mercurial for versioning, and I also use both those tools for
deploying. Very neat little tools indeed.

## What would be your dream setup?

I spend a lot of time travelling, so portability is probably the most important
factor. Basically if I could have an 11” MacBook Air with Mac Pro performance,
I’d be happy.
