---
title: On Technical Debt
date: 2019-10-04
location: Gdynia, Poland
tags: business
banner: bridge.jpg
---

Robert C. Martin — who is usually wrong about most things — says this in
defence of what is supposedly the original motivation for the Agile Manifesto:

> You need something that keeps you CLEAN, ‘cause you need something that keeps
> the code from rotting. How many developers do we have in the room? How many
> of you have been significantly slowed down by bad code … generated by a Scrum
> team going too fast? When you go fast and you are focusing on getting stories
> done, and stories done, and stories done, and stories done … the code can ROT
> just as fast as you are moving. And so what happens after a year is that the
> rate begins to slow. Not because you’re working less hard – you’re putting in
> a hell of a lot of effort – it’s just that you can’t force the code to accept
> the next new feature.

One of the best things you can do for yourself as a software developer is
running your own business. I don’t mean a consultancy business where you’re
essentially an employee that sends invoices every month. I mean something more
like a product business.

When you’re building a business, you don’t know what features are going to
bring money in. It is so well-known that we all _don’t_ know what we’re doing
that the startup in-joke is to put “pivot” explicitly somewhere on the roadmap.

I will by no means defend Agile as I think that’s mostly bureaucratic and
ceremonial nonsense, but the aversion to technical debt is in my opinion the
most likely cause of this supposed divide between business and programmers.

Who cares if the feature you implement is beautifully designed and backed by a
comprehensive suite of automated tests, if that feature ends up not making any
money and is scrapped anyway?

Professional software development doesn’t happen in a vacuum. The code you
write is an investment, and you and/or the business should expect to see a
return on it. Technical debt is an excellent way to limit potential losses from
investing in a feature or system which turns out not to be profitable.

Debt is not a bad thing. Debt is what allows you to live in your house before
you can actually pay for all of it.
